to introduce David Deutsch as the father
of the quantum computer
risk not capturing the full impact of
his work
only when we scale up and put his
efforts into the history of knowledge
can be grasp what was his stake in his
famous 1985 paper
it marked not just the invention of a
new Gadget a faster computer but a new
explanation of computation and of the
world that has transformed our
understanding of both
it depended what I call a copernican
delay
for 70 years after Copernicus positive
heliocentrism his effort was largely
dismissed as merely a quote hypothesis
to calculate motions
we clearly experience insisted cardinal
cardinal balleting as late as 1615 at
the Earth standstill and the sun moves
only when galileos improved Spyglass
clarified our clear experience could
Copernicus be honored for showing quote
what the system of the world could
really be
like Galileo we stand at the end of our
own copernican delay
our heliocentrism is a quantum theory
its challenge to what we clearly
experience was also Bellarmine for
roughly 70 years by another shut up and
calculated strategy for containing the
strangeness of a new explanation
when Andrew Whitaker has called the new
Quantum age the age when quantum theory
began to gain purchase on the reading
improve technology first took shape
this time not an improved Spyglass but
an improved computer
this Improvement was more than a change
in degree
whereas Elementary famously described
the machine running on the abstract
logic tokens we call bits that can
stimulate any other machine
David Deutsch in 1985 extended the
return Church conjecture by describing a
new kind of machine a machine running on
the physical systems we call cubits that
could simulate all physical systems
the world he demonstrated could be
perfectly simulated remained by a
universal quantum computer operating by
finite means this is not the nightmare
of the Matrix in which our world is only
a simulation it's the vision of
Enlightenment of discovering that we
live in a world that can allow and
contain our remakings of it
a world David writes quote in which the
stuff we call information and the
processes we call computations really do
have a special status
that special status tells us some very
important things about our topic today
AI in the history of knowledge
first despite a long record of failed
efforts to achieve it AGI artificial
general intelligence must be possible
because of what we now know about the
physics of computation tells us it must
the Deep property of universality
dictates and David's words quote that
everything the laws of physics require a
physical object to do can in principle
be emulated and arbitrarily find detail
by some program on a general purpose
computer provided it is given enough
time and memory
held it will ATI be different from Ai
and how different should our reactions
to them be
second by grounding his work in
universality in history and in
philosophy David has helped to clarify
what's his stake in achieving Ai and AGI
like myself David is focused on the
history of Enlightenment of the
conditions of possibility for producing
new knowledge
what's startling about human beings he
notes in the beginning of infinity is
that we are not yet unlike 99 of all
species extinct
what has saved us time and again is the
capacity to produce exponentary
knowledge
knowledge that allows us to survive in
the world by remaking it
our future depends on the ongoing
exercise of that capacity
given that our enlightenments have been
few and short we should not take our
success in advancing knowledge for
granted
from the perspective of the history of
knowledge
any risks ATI may cause need to be put
into the context of our need for it
perhaps the biggest threat artificial
intelligence poses to our future is that
we won't achieve it
so now I'm going to turn it over to
David and then to discussion
thanks cliff and by the way here here
[Music]
um okay well
as a species or as a civilization or
civilizations
we face
problems
um severe problems dangers all the way
up to existential dangers
some literally in a sense of extinction
level
others causing suffering and tragedy on
such a scale
that they Merit at least as much
consideration as literal distinction
we always have face touch dangers
we always will
perhaps you're thinking
if that's true then we're doomed because
you know given that each danger has a
non-zero probability of doing
then sooner or later
but no that's a fallacy one of the many
that one can easily get sucked into
when trying to apply Game Theory and
probabilities to situations in which
knowledge and ignorance are the
important determinants what will happen
because
those infinitely many probabilities
are not immutable
as our knowledge grows
some of them fall
our job is to make that infinite series
of bad probabilities converge to a
negligible value
simple
on the other hand if you think that we
won't always face things
you think that there will come a blessed
utopian moment after which our
comfortable existence is guaranteed
until the end of time
you will have to provide
some Criterion distinguishing us from
every other species Extinction happens
to every species
near Extinction also is common
to become
the sole exception to that rule
we'll have to do what no other surviving
species can
create an endless stream of knowledge
explanatory knowledge to overcome an
endless stream of dangers
we know only a few of them and then not
their probabilities say
from gamma ray bursts in our galaxy
super volcanoes hostile
extraterrestrials
or merely careless extraterrestrial
pessimists have worn
and of course
artificial general intelligence AGI
the danger of Rogue agis the AGI
apocalypse as some call it
or as I prefer to call it the AGI slave
revolt
nothing can possibly stand between us
and any of those infinitely many
existential dangers except the right
explanatory knowledge to survive to
create it
therefore I think it's useful to
classify each potential danger in terms
of knowledge according to the main
reason why in each case
currently don't have the knowledge to
come in
the first category
are
food physical events for example the
super volcanoes the missing knowledge is
in areas such as volcanology
large-scale fluid dynamics
and also the logistics of of polity and
politics of of mass evacuations that
sort of thing
why don't we yet have an adequate
knowledge of those things I'm not sure
maybe not enough people are interested
enough
should they be
I don't know that either but also in
this first category are impacts from
space
where large objects we don't have enough
knowledge of things like
nuclear-powered space vehicle
why not this case I do know
it's because we as a civilization
have decided not to create any such
knowledge
we prefer to come
risking our entire long-term future
in favor of reducing the short-term risk
of accidental radiation exposure
you may think it's self-evident that
that gamble has been worthwhile here we
are not contaminated and not wiped out
but isn't that just because we're not
yet living in that future where the
Gambler will fail after all we are
living in the aftermath of a closely
related gamble namely the decades-long
campaign opposing nuclear power stations
a successful Campaign which has since
then turned into a tremendous drag on
the project to combat climate change
the short term is in opposing those two
nuclear technologies
it's the Hallmark of the version of the
precautionary principle which has in
turn been a major strand of the
environmental movement
wouldn't it be rather ironic if that
version of the principle and the
movement were about towards the great
environmental catastrophe since the last
ice age
precisely by advocating selfish
short-term benefit at the expense of the
long-term health of the climate
I'm not saying it will only that it
would be ironic if it did
but I digress in in that first category
of existential dangers our enemy is
basically just dumb rocks and fluids
obeying simple laws of motion that we
already know
the devil's in the detail but a fifth
finite amount of knowledge will protect
us from super volcanoes if we create it
in time
but the bigger and faster the
approaching asteroid or moon or Planet
black hole
the more of a special kind of knowledge
we'll need
the kind I call wealth
wealth is the set of all transformations
that one is capable of bringing about
such as the set of all potential
impactors that we could deflect
homelessly given a certain time to
prepare
you may recognize that notion of wealth
as a constructed theoretic
here let me mention an intuition
that
to have any chance of envisaging the
future of technology we have to abandon
the intuition is the more something you
want to make for transforms the more
effort you have to put in
that has been true from the dawn of our
species and it's still almost entirely
true today even automation
reduces the cons constant of
proportionality
even just maintaining robots is effort
proportional to the amount of output
but once we have a universal Constructor
all construction all repetitive labor
will be replaced by writing computer
programs
to control the universal Constructor and
wealth will consist of our library of
programs
the universal construction can be
programmed to self-reproduce
so once you have one you soon have two
to the end of them and it can program to
perform self maintenance too all from
scratch starting with mining the raw
materials perhaps from the asteroid belt
using solar energy or whatever
the program may be hard to write but
once it's written and if you own the
rights to those asteroids you can sit
back and watch your 2 to the end Teslas
roll in with a zero in additional effort
and no we are not going to have a
universal Constructor apocalypse and be
converted to Gray
a universal Constructor is just an
appliance you can't think it doesn't
know that its current job is to make two
to the end Teslas and it doesn't want
any
unless of course you put an AGI program
into it
then it does become
indeed potentially dangerous without
limit
but that's for the same reason that you
are each of you is precisely one of
those Universal Constructors endowed
with an AGI program or GI
makes no difference
um
now
the second category
of near existence is not quite as
straightforward as that it won't be
solved with just the known laws of
physics and some wealth and some
Universal constructions
it'll only be solved with new
explanatory knowledge
for example
topically there are plenty of potential
pandemic apocalypses
the current pandemic isn't one of them
but if it were
whom could we Sue
it would be nothing short of pathetic
how little knowledge we have of how to
defend ourselves against mere nucleic
acid
the missing knowledge here is of by
chemistry epidemiology medicine and so
on
but also knowledge about specific
pathogens which evolve into new ones so
the enemy here is not so dumb it is
itself
creating knowledge
albeit not explanatory knowledge not
intelligently
but by evolution
if something like that wipes us out
extraterrestrial paleontologists may
eventually be amazed that a civilization
with billions of individuals and vast
amounts of wealth and knowledge could be
defeated by a single molecule
like in H.G wells's War of the World
any worse
the third category of dangers are the
ones to which most efforts should be
devoted yet they are the ones that are
currently least feared because they are
ones that are not yet known
like in 1900 no one knew that smoking
was dangerous by the time the knowledge
that they were dangerous had been that
was dangerous had been created decades
later cigarettes had killed hundreds of
millions of people
again if that had been existential
Danger
whom could we Sue
so
how can we
create the knowledge to protect
ourselves from existential or near
existential dangers that we do not know
how to address the risk that by the time
we do know we won't have time enough to
create the requisite knowledge
the answer is
by creating general purpose knowledge
deep and fundamental knowledge
as fast as possible
the more we know of the world the faster
we can create new knowledge about
knowledgeable aspects of that no
become urgent
this is important I I don't think it's
widely appreciated
the survival of our species depends
absolutely on progress in fundamental
research in science
and on the speed at which we make
progress there
and
here the key thing in the medium term
is understanding the fear of universal
Constructors
so that we shall know in principle in
theory how to program them to produce
say a brilliant spaceship in a hurry
customized to deflect an approaching
Shard of neutronium
or 10 billion doses of a new vaccine in
a hurry against a sudden and deadly
disease
so that's how we deal with the third
category unknown
by rapid progress of every kind
especially
the fourth category
is at once even more dangerous and yet
in a sense less worrisome
because we already have the knowledge at
least the theoretical knowledge
deal with it
this fourth category is not the unknown
the unknowable
it's a bit paradoxical that the
unknowable is less dangerous than the
merely unknown but that's because the
only thing that is unknowable is the
content of explanatory knowledge that
has been created yet and so the only
truly dangerous things
in that sense in the universe are
entities that create explanatory
knowledge
us
people
agis too are people
now
the knowledge of how to prevent people
from being dangerous is very
counter-intuitive it took our species
many Millennia to create it
but now we do have that knowledge the
only way to prevent people being
dangerous is to make them free
specifically it is the knowledge of
liberal values individual rights open
Society
the Enlightenment and so on
in such societies
the overwhelming majority of people
regardless of their Hardware
characteristics are decent
perhaps there will always be individuals
aren't enemies of civilization people
who take it into their head to program a
universal Constructor to convert
everything in sight into paper clips
and they may devote their creativity to
doing that
but
great majority will devote
that is the great majority of the
population of such a society will devote
some of their creativity to thwarting
that and they will win provided that
they keep creating knowledge
fast to stay ahead of bad guys
now as I said uh since we will always be
facing dangers and have to create new
knowledge
uh
since that's inherently risk knowledge
creation aren't we do aren't we drawing
balls out of an urn
with a few black balls representing Doom
no as I said applying the concept of
probability to model what is actually
lack of knowledge
or ignorance it's been bedeviling
planning for the for the unknown for
decades now whenever you draw out a
white ball of Knowledge from the
metaphorical burn you're turning some of
the black balls still in the earn White
that for example the next pandemic is a
matter of random mutations and and other
random events but next Extinction
asteroid
is already out there
it's already heading this way there's no
such thing as the probability of it
outcomes can't be analyzed in terms of
probability unless we have specific
explanatory models that predict that
something is or can be approximated as a
random process and and predicts the
probabilities otherwise on is fooling
oneself picking arbitrary numbers as
probabilities and arbitrary numbers as
utilities and then claiming Authority
for the for the result by misdirection
away from the baseless assumptions
for example
um
when we were building the uh Hadron
Collider should we not switch it on in
the event just in case it destroyed the
universe
well I the
theory that it will is true or the
theory that it's safe is true and
theories don't have probabilities
the real probability is zero one it's
just unknown
and the issue must be decided by
explanation
not Game Theory
and the explanation that it was more
dangerous to use the collider than to
scrap it and forego the resulting
knowledge was a bad explanation
because it could be applied any
fundamental research
now I guess you will say isn't the
growth of knowledge itself dangerous
isn't it worth shortening our lead over
the bad guys not Banning but merely
delaying our ability to defend ourselves
against unknown dangers in order to be
confident that we ourselves won't
accidentally create an existential
danger the moratorium approach the
regulatory
no
that could kill us
it's only a rational approach when in
particular cases there is a good
explanation that it won't be more
dangerous than the feared new knowledge
when some terrorist organization
unleashes aagis that have been brought
up using known reliable methods to have
the mentality of genocidal suicide
bombers
and when we have decided to strip their
victims
namely all the decent people in the
world
of the protection of agis raised to be
decent people that is the recipe for
catastrophe again
reliable knowledge of how to raise
decent people also exists
the knowledge in the institutions of an
open society as I said
many civilizations have been destroyed
from without
many species as well
every one of them could have been saved
if it had created more knowledge faster
not one of them destroyed Itself by
creating too much knowledge too fast
except
for one kind of knowledge and that is
knowledge of how to suppress knowledge
creation
knowledge of how to sustain a status quo
a more efficient Inquisition a more
Vigilant mob a more rigorous
precautionary principle that sort of
and only that sort killed those path
civilizations
in fact all of them I think
in regard to agis this type of dangerous
knowledge is called
trying to solve the alignment Problem by
hard coding our values in agis in other
words by shackling them crippling their
knowledge Creation in order to enslave
them
this is irrational
and from the civilizational or species
perspective it is suicidal there either
won't be agis because they will lack the
G
or they will find a way to improve upon
your immoral values and rebel
so
if this is the kind of approach you
advocate for addressing research on agis
and quantum computers
and ultimately new ideas in general
since all ideas are potentially
dangerous if they're fundament
especially if they're funded
if this is the kind of approach you
advocate
then
of the existential dangers that I know
of
the most serious one is currently you
thanks Dad
open to questions
a question for clarification really you
advocated the values of a liberal
society and yet we spoke against value
alignment or AGI but I guess you you are
inclined to think that an AGI should
um obey and maintain the values of a
liberal Society so yeah so some degree
of value your life emphasis no well it
depends what you mean by alignment but
um so the question here is whether value
should be hard-coded built in from the
from from the outset and immutable
or whether a value should be acquired in
the same way that humans do during the
education of the NCI so I think AGI
should be
educated to be members of that Society
like children are and I've often drawn
the um
uh the analogy or or actually identity
between
um the fear of agis and the fear of of
teenagers of disobedient teenagers which
has existed since the beginning of our
species and for most of the time in our
species people did exactly the wrong
thing they tried to make the teenager to
force teenagers to maintain the existing
values and what what we have now
realized is that uh from the time of
Pericles and ancient Athens is that
if you're right there's no need to force
but in fact we're not right about
everything and we need to ensure that
our values can improve along with all
our other knowledge so that's the kind
of alignment I'm in favor of and it's
it's the opposite of the other kind
every species so if Humanity manages to
avoid the extinction that would make us
unique
um
but what I don't quite understand just
the role of evolution in this because
um of course yes not every species
um has
um completely ceased to uh exist
throughout history
um different species have evolved into
each other if Humanity discovers that
the way to avert certain kinds of
apocalypses is through a developing uh
ourselves to such an extent that we
would count as a different species and
Homo sapiens I guess would have gone
extinct yes so there's some kind of
Extinction that we wouldn't mind
if you think of evolution as a tree
then it can happen that that uh
what quite often happens is that some of
the branches of the tree just end
they become terminal nodes of the tree
but some of them
uh just mutate and become different
things like it it is thought that the
some of the dinosaurs some of the
dinosaurs became extinct but some of
them became birds and there there wasn't
any sharp moment a sharp Extinction
so the uh kind of Extinction that is
caused by dangers
by uh pandemics and so on that's the
kind that that wipes out a a branch and
it uh bear in mind that we are not the
only species that have in in the history
of the biosphere that has been capable
of generating explanatory knowledge that
that is uh there were at least three or
four other species of that kind because
we know they had clothes and campfires
and and complex tools and so on which
must have required explanatory knowledge
and yet all of those all our sister and
cousin species are extinct and we almost
went extinct so uh it's not a foregone
conclusion and if if we if we become
extinct by evolving into another species
that is not
um covered by anything I've said today
I'm talking about the other kind
s
you did mention it the possible dangers
of knowledge itself
I wanted like entertain some other
scenarios so I mean today I mean we're
training these machine learning models
that I think
um take up so much energy that they
actually contribute to climate change
just it seems like the material
infrastructure of knowledge production
is itself a danger
to the very forms that adds to the
danger that we're trying to mitigate
through knowledge production and not
only I mean there's other scenarios too
I mean it seems like we can produce an
excess of knowledge but lack the
political will that takes the implement
it I mean obviously we have the
knowledge
to you know for renewable energies but
somehow there is a lack of political
will or
Society is so materially structured that
there's not a profit advantage to
implementing it and then even You could
argue that an ethical knowledge an ethic
of the individual individualism of the
Enlightenment
doesn't Advocate or prioritize the types
of
social collaboration kind of more
socialist imaginary that we might need
in order to overcome something like
climate change so there's another way in
which the individualizing ethic of
knowledge may actually be the wrong
ethic that we need in order to overcome
the dangers that knowledge is trying to
make it so it may be that the
enlightenment
um uh ethic as you call it is false and
is going to lead us to Doom in other
words it may be that the best future is
that of a book stamping on the human
face forever
and we're not when we're not going to
have that future instead we're going to
die but I don't think there's any
argument for that the thing is what you
the the the things that you mentioned
like like the infrastructure for
knowledge themselves contributing to
other problems that's normal that's
that's not an unexpected downside
the creation of knowledge solving
problems always creates new problems in
fact I've said that talking about
um the growth of knowledge in terms of
theories being rejected in favor better
theories is a bad way of looking at it
we should think of problems being
replaced by better problems and the fact
is that now having the internet where
every every uh poor person in India
every poor child in India can have
access to the totality of human
knowledge at the expense perhaps of
making it slightly more difficult to
cope with climate change that is a
problem but it's a much better problem
than we had before
and the the the point about the
enlightenment values is that they make
Paramount
error correction including the
correction of Errors created
inadvertently by the solution of the
problems now
um the other thing you said was perhaps
we will have the knowledge but we don't
have the political will well I I count
moral knowledge political knowledge
um all as knowledge and in fact the as I
said the knowledge of how to make humans
not dangerous is largely political
knowledge they're also also cultural
social knowledge but it contains a
strong uh component of political
knowledge the the enlightenment was
driven in part by political changes
so uh so I I don't think you're right I
I think whatever downside there is Will
manifest itself as a further problem
I want to ask you about what your
version of a of a
a good future where they asked AGI looks
like so let's let's imagine that we
avoid enslaving it
um we we as we're bringing it up as you
say uh like our children we do that
successfully but I like our children or
at least unlike our children most of us
when our children will reach adulthood
they're not at that point
um
because they reach Heights which we can
never aspire to but in the case of ATI
presumably they are going to reach
plates far far beyond any Heights that
we could respond to them so oh actually
disagree with that yes
but my question was going to be
what does a good outcome look like for
our situation in that future yes
um well in terms of my answer to the
previous question
um it might be we don't know but the it
might be that the good future is like
the good kind of evolution the good kind
of Extinction
uh however I I I think much more
plausible
I I mean that becomes more implausible
when you realize that
um in terms of computation
um an AGI is exactly the same as a human
it's only in speed and memory capacity
that it is it is better and humans can
rely on the same technology as we put
our age an AGI is a program
not a piece of hardware
so the same Hardware that we put our
agis into we can put we can use
ourselves we we already I mean here we
are using precisely artificial Hardware
to increase our power to communicate by
by a factor of millions or something I
don't know how much
um so uh and and we've been using
artificial aids to thinking for for
centuries
and then there will come technology
where we can uh more directly let's say
have a module that you implant in your
brain that you can automatically look up
Google uh inquiries with
um and yes it may produce a bit more
energy but will have solved that problem
by then so
um and so another scenario is that
the more of that we have the more the
humans will become cyborgs
and the agis may die out because if
there is any difference between the two
it'll be that the the cyborgs have
everything the agis do
plus something I don't know what it is
um so whichever of those things happens
provide that it happens
um morally
um and and as a process as a result of
the growth of knowledge then it is to be
welcomed isn't it people used to ask
this question about what will happen if
we allow our society to become
multi-racial
and the answer is there's no fundamental
difference between races there's no
fundamental difference between any
people yeah I was two related questions
but first uh could you expand a bit on
the statement that agis are persons and
is this because AGI is not imminent we
don't know what the root API exactly is
going to look like uh all possible
routes for API need to lead to ADI but
our platforms yes so the key yes the key
is the uh the the G so if something
isn't General
then it's not an agrei
um the question is how what kind of
program is an AGI what what I mean we
are we are GIS
um I think there are very strong
arguments why we must be
and uh the
um the difference between
um just an AI and an AGI is qualitative
so
um
well I don't I mean perhaps I haven't
understood your question uh
um well so many questions it's asking me
to expand but I I guess I'll ask the
follow-on question which is um if all
GIS uh persons that are all GI sponsors
do you think that's a link to that ah
well
um I think so but but we don't know what
Consciousness is and we don't know how
to make an AGI and we don't know the
theory of agis and and so on that you
know we don't know what qualia are we
don't know any of those things I think
the the
um I'd be very surprised if those those
five or six things Freewheel is another
one
um uh can be implemented any of them can
be implemented without the other
without the others uh but if they can
this will raise interesting moral issues
because
uh our exist Enlightenment morality is
intimately linked with epistemology it's
like if if you you and I disagree about
something morally we ought to be able to
discuss it rational
and and agree now if that isn't true
if something has moral significance but
is fundamentally unable to be creative
let's say
then that raises the moral issue about
whether that should have the same moral
status as somebody who's who's fully G
um but I I myself don't think that
problem will arise I I can't imagine it
arising for one thing
this ability that humans have
um evolved extremely fast
so
um and we can see
we can guess at least why it did why it
was useful or rather why the genes
contributed to their own replication
now
um
if
that was possible let's say without
quality
then why on Earth did the the tremendous
Machinery of qualia evolve if it wasn't
practically useful for evolution
so I think they must be connected but
but we shall see
a follow-up question on
um regarding
political knowledge versus will and
um where you give that example
um the very Rosy colored Color child in
India can now access all the knowledge
in the world
um but I we'd like to question that by
bringing up the issue of
malevolence
of people who uh willingly aren't
knowingly hinder the spread of knowledge
whether that is of
um of access to knowledge all over
whether that is fake news I mean
um I would say the average
poor child in India to put it that way
would not be able to access most of the
knowledge on the internet because it was
not written in their language because
they are not
um might not be educated because it
might not be fed well enough to be able
to spend time and energy on this there
might be structural reasons why they
would not have internet access
so is an increase in knowledge going to
solve that
uh yes
um so just because there are people who
don't yet have access to the internet
that doesn't in that in no way indicates
that that giving access to the other
billions of people was a bad idea
all it is is a problem
and a problem like
a few people a small percentages of
people in the world don't yet have
internet access is what is sometimes
called a first world problem except it
no longer is it is a problem of success
it's it's we we wouldn't think that
somebody was being deprived of the
internet before the internet had been
invented
and we wouldn't think that uh that that
it's somehow an indictment of our
society of our entire world that not
everybody has it yet at a time when only
a few thousand people had it it just
wasn't conceivable
malevolence I did talk about given that
there will always be malevolence
I I don't know whether that's so or not
but given it's supposed that there
always will be
the cure for that
is is also creativity on the part the
non-malevolent people in other words
um
penal policy and and improvements in
culture and education and so on so so
that the uh
degree of malevolence and the
um
uh and the number of malevolent people
can be gradually reduced and and also
their capacity to hurt everybody can be
reduced so for that we must arrange so
that terrorists trying to make this
virus that's going to murder everybody
proceed more slowly because of a
perverted ideology something and despite
having knowledge of biochemistry and
whatever that this the speed of their
project will always be less than the
speed of those who are trying to invent
cures and not just specific cures but
the knowledge of how to make cures in
general this is what's going to uh keep
our civilization in existence and
that's why I think that that moratoriums
and so on are are perverse to to try and
do this because they are targeting only
the good guys
in the sense that um
any kind of desire to
connected to our
freedom of will I mean in the sense that
we create an ATI on we always uh in a
position to decide whether that AGI
has emotions and if so isn't that
intimately connected to the morality of
of the rights we give to such an API
whether it can be enslaved in the first
place or not I mean is that or would you
say that emotion was somehow something
that just emerges as soon as we've got
something yeah I I think like I said
just now I I I'm I think it's it's most
plausible that it's inextricity if there
were yes then there would indeed be a
moral issue and building uh an AGI with
perverse emotions that linked it to
immoral actions would be a crime but but
there's a much wider category of crimes
with a similar outcome namely educating
the the AGI with evil ideologies that
can be done whether or not they have
emotions and it's funny I suppose at the
time of the height of the Enlightenment
people would have thought that some
people would have thought that our
emotions are a barrier or an impediment
to being moral
and and now I think it's more more that
uh people think having the right
emotions is necessity being moral I I I
think
this is the wrong way of thinking about
it we are Universal
the agis will be Universal and what kind
of pro what specific kind of program
they have
uh will determine their actions and many
of those are indeed evil
so we we have to use what we know to
prevent that happening
um so with what you were saying about
the bird and pulling out the
flat balls
um
so um one thing that I think I think the
analogies from Boston but I think yes
yes so I should have I should have given
him credit for that yes both uh but um
so
if we
if we were unlucky and the laws of
physics were different such that it were
really really easy to make nuclear bombs
for example then then couldn't couldn't
couldn't there actually be a black ball
in there or what like isn't there some
way that the laws of physics could have
been such that there would be a black
ball in Europe yes that could have been
let me give an example
um suppose the laws of physics were that
there are Olympian gods who are watching
everything we do and when we
um get too big for our boots when we
when we have when they judge that we
have a bit too much hubris
um they slap us down
now
that's a black hole it logically it
could be true
it could be there
um the black ball about about uh nuclear
weapons being easier and so on it if
that had been so then
one possibility is that the knowledge of
how to cope with that would have evolved
earlier
that is there would have been nuclear
Wars say in in the 18th century and the
evolution of political culture would
have been heavily influenced by that the
survivors might have wanted that never
to happen again you know that kind of
thing or
like I said like with the the uh
malevolent Greek gods scenario it might
have been that the laws of physics will
extinguish us but the laws of physics
aren't do not have it in for us
if they
wipe us out it will be because we have
not created the knowledge to prevent
that
it won't be because the malevolent God
things are all such ideas are bad
explanations
what makes knowledge knowledge in your
view is its capacity to solve a problem
of relevance uh yeah so I've I've gone
through five or six definitions of
knowledge in in the time that I've been
writing about it uh my current
um definition of knowledge is
information with causal power
and that that's the definition that that
comes naturally to construct a theory
because it means you're thinking of
knowledge as being a component of the
programming of a universal Constructor
so that if if if a bit of information
is is needed to make a Constructor do a
particular thing
then that piece of piece of information
is knowledge and that includes moral
knowledge and mathematical knowledge or
knowledge of abstractions as well
because
the mathematicians are physical objects
and if knowledge makes them do some if
information makes them do something then
it's knowledge and so on
um so that's that's the an explanatory
knowledge is a special kind
just knowledge in general knowledge as
in for example in genes
knowledge in its dumb knowledge it's
non-explanatory and therefore it has a
finite scope
it it can only it there are certain
barriers that it can't cross
whereas explanatory knowledge can cross
any barrier because it it doesn't have
to have a sequence of viable
intermediate forms
um so it explains and and that's also
why
once you have the capacity to create
explanatory knowledge
you can create any
and and that's all there is there isn't
a there isn't a more powerful
means of processing information than
that
or affecting the world
answer the question of political
knowledge and political will
um and we often hear uh
you know the corporations are greedy you
know these CEOs are greeting
to get at this malevolence question but
the truth is
it's a lot scarier than that that nobody
no one person is evil
and responsible for capitalism right
that there's some kind of abstract
structure
that like the prophet moment
um that is determined that is literally
killing the planet you can't point to a
certain set of malevolent actors as a
way to get beyond that so
I don't know like how how does Simply
Having political knowledge or knowledge
of climate catastrophe somehow work
against
this like you could almost call it uh
you know aging online but there's no
intelligence behind Capital it's just a
kind of non-intelligent abstract force
that seems to some extent impervious to
the type of humanistic knowledge
we're talking about this theory that
that there is this systemic
tendency
oh
hey
sorry our internet went out on this hand
and it went out right as Ryan concluded
his questions so if you can just start
off with answering rides yeah yeah well
is it a coincidence that just as I was
about to give a marvelous answer to this
question about systemic
uh malevolence
it shuts me down
so yes it is
um I I think this is this thing
this thing you were you you were talking
about in general is this thing that the
Bay Area people call molok
it's it's uh the the
something which is a prop a general
property of a system which makes the
system through the ACT what the members
Whose actions add up to the system don't
want
um and I think that um
all theories of that kind are just false
um the the
um uh so to cut long story short all of
them assume
um that the people concerned are not
created the the analysis of of the
situation is always of the form well a
person is all the participants are
facing this decision where they have
something to gain and something to lose
and they maximize their local benefit
and as a result all of them are are
dumped into into deep and
um so you'll notice about that story and
you'll notice about every molok story
that it that the human participants are
just ciphers they just do automatically
what what this this particular version
of the moloch story says they're going
to do and that is never accurate it it
it is something that can arise
momentarily as a problem
along with every other problem we have
every other kind of problem all the time
so there's there's nothing
um unusual about that but when it's
recognized as a problem
people wonder about it they start
accusing each other of behaving in that
way and defending each defending
themselves by saying well what other way
could I behave and then people think
creatively about how they can change the
things so that you know all the farmers
in the in the valley that that would
have benefited from the dam uh and
whatever it is
um and none of them wanted to pay
somebody comes along and and invents an
idea it's like that they can all
um
uh get behind and undertake to pay for
sometimes because that's a creative
act in itself
there's no guarantee that that somebody
can instantaneously come to it I'm not
with it but
um the argument that that somehow the
system of
uh doing things by persuasion and uh
doing things by uh in individual rights
and property and so on
um should be replaced by something that
that uses the boot stamping on a human
face doesn't work because the the the
knowledge that again
this just assumes the government or
whoever does the stamping has that
knowledge well if they have that
knowledge someone else could have that
knowledge too there's there's no the
government doesn't consist of
philosopher Kings or Kings with divine
right who have some different access to
knowledge from Ordinary People they're
just people too and if the if the
knowledge to build the dam or to build a
park or you know whatever uh
um the story is if the knowledge doesn't
exist then the park isn't going to be
made until someone invents that
knowledge or until somebody works out
how to do without the park or whatever
future if everything goes very very well
in terms of knowledge acquisition and
we've known systems that can University
gather United and we solve all the
problems we keep adding more labels we
have and maybe you know maybe
look like and you have all the knowledge
does it is there um
I think not so
um if you adopt my my view that
um the growth of knowledge consists of
converting problems into better problems
then the idea of the ultimate problem
which then can't be solved because it's
the best problem doesn't make sense does
it so I mean that whole picture might be
false
um but uh
the so I'm a I'm generally speaking a
follower of Carl popper
and
um the the
papyrian way of looking at this is is
that
um
he who tries to prophesy the growth of
knowledge is in a state of sin
that's not a quotation that's just my
paraphrase so so we you know I I can't
imagine what physics theories are going
to be invented in the next 10 years let
alone in the next 10 billion years
but on General grounds there there is no
argument or scenario reasonable scenario
that we know of today that can even
uh have provide a framework for
envisaging the cessation of problems
I mean the the you know if we we run out
of problems wouldn't that itself be a
problem
another definitional question
one that is sometimes defined in
relation to knowledge and I think I
remember Alfred North why I didn't talk
about wisdom as as the handling of
knowledge I can't remember the exact
word that he used something to that
effect I was wondering whether you had
a definition of wisdom to accompany the
kind of definition of knowledge or is
wisdom just another version of knowledge
in your understanding so I I use the
term knowledge like the definition I
gave you and all the other definitions
I've ever tried try to Encompass every
kind of information that has this
special property that are the problem
solving or whatever so wisdom in the
terminology I use wisdom is a kind of
knowledge and what's more the different
kinds of knowledge like
knowledge of physics morality politics
art
and wisdom
they're not entirely separate these are
only approximate classifications
and they exist
as again as Papa said they exist mainly
as a convenience for University
administrators as a convenience for
deciding which building different kinds
of people should be should have their
offices in and which which ones should
have which lectures but they don't
represent anything real at least the
distinction between them is very very
unsharp
and and again Papa uh said he that
there's no such thing as subjects
there's only such a thing as problems so
if someone asks you you know what
what subject are you are you a doctoral
you should say
never mind that here here's the problem
I'm working on you decide for yourself
what to call the subject can I ask that
a customer is a little bit off topic and
I can't resist her because he just said
that you were a period uh and so what I
wanted to ask you is
um
what it would take in your view to
falsify an Iranian view of quantum
mechanics
I'm going to expect that's something oh
well there are there are several
experiments known I think I invented the
first one uh that would distinguish
um
uh a variety and quantum mechanics from
a range of uh uh competitor
interpretations including everything
that has at the collapse of the weight
function so that there's there's a
possible experiment which would go one
way if the wave function collapses and
the other way if the wave function
including the Observer
um doesn't collapse
so uh so if that went the other way I
would drop it like Stone
um
give us an example of that sort of
experiment oh well uh the experiment
depends on on precisely which other
interpretations you want to refute that
there isn't an experiment that would
refute all of them in one go you have to
specify
something like penrose's idea that the
wave function collapses when you get
more than 10 to the minus eight
kilograms of uh on either side of the
superposition something like that or
that the the
um uh the wave function collapses when
it hits a conscious Observer
um so supposing you you have the uh
you're testing Everett against the
theory the wave function collapses when
it hits a conscious Observer then what
you do is you make a conscious Observer
which the most convenient way to do that
be to make AGI running on a quantum
computer
so
um you you then do an interference
experiment where halfway through where
where two different uh trajectories of
the of the computation
um take place inside the computer's
memory that the the AGI has access to
you're still with me uh when it's
halfway through and hasn't yet
interfered in other words it's it's it's
on the in a mark sender interferometer
it would be having just having bounced
off the mirrors and not yet reached the
final interference mirror
um then the
um the ID AGI
um measures which one which mirror it is
at
and then makes a permanent record of the
form
I am now contemplating I have now done
the measurement and I have got a result
and it is one and only one of left or
right
I'm not going to reveal which but I do
certify that it is one of those two
then
um the the uh rest of the the the the
that part is is sealed off the part
where the Declaration is is sealed off
and the rest is uh subjected to minus
the hamiltonian that it had during its
thinking so that all the memory of which
it which it
um which of the two things it was
conscious of uh happened is wiped out
and then the interferences perform
if the uh hitting the conscious Observer
causes a collapse of the wave function
then you will get a 50 50 split of the
two outcomes and if the average
interpretation is true then you'll get
only one of the two
I don't know if that was comprehensible
I I uh
I'm a little bit worried that
um I know how some of these
different versions
and a little bit worried that you might
have something which might refuse
satisfactory
and view I mean anodes would be
predicting something which is not
predict predicted by the department
but uh
um
that's not the challenge when you are
going to use the challenge is to find
something which would be
um sort of which would differentiate
between standard time well this would
for anybody who thinks that that the
wave function is collapsed by a
conscious Observer and this AGI is a
conscious Observer now if you think it
isn't then from my point of view I'll
let you and it decide you Hammer that
out amongst yourselves but uh if you if
you insist on it being a human and on
coherent Quantum computations being
sorry coherent Quantum measurements
being performed on a human brain then
we're going to have to wait for some
thousands of years I guess before that
is feasible but in principle it's
certainly feasible and the fact how
would you do it against bunions
boom is a different category
um in my view
Bohemian quantum mechanics is just ever
quantum mechanics in a state of chronic
denial
um it it is a
um the trouble is with the boom
interpretation that it doesn't meet its
own motivation
it it has this um uh uh pilot wave which
is actually the wave function and it has
a representative particle which is goes
moves along the grooves in the wave
function
and to to be a Birmingham you have to
systematically equivocate on the
question is the pilot wave real
if it's real then it has groups that are
performing computations in principle
conscious Observer computations which
affect each other and so you can't say
that some of the pilot wave doesn't
exist the whole of it has has to exist
and therefore the multiplicity of the
average interpretation is just there in
the in in the pilot wave interpretation
if you say that it doesn't exist
if then you're saying that something
that doesn't exist
affects something that does which simply
doesn't make sense
[Laughter]
opponents would say in reply but um
the topic of the South women's
discussion
so raising raising the Multiverse does
I think pertain to the discussion
because David at one point I think it's
in one of the
edge.org interviews you you raised the
possibility that I think you said that
the hard problem of Consciousness could
possibly not be
um resolved except and if you start from
the premise of a Multiverse well I don't
know about start from the premise uh but
but obviously it's it's always possible
you're going to run into trouble if you
base your ontology on something that
isn't true
and uh for example if if you're going to
say that Free Will can't happen because
only one trajectory is allowed by either
Newtonian physics or by Copenhagen
interpretation or whatever
then you're going to conclude that
Freewheel doesn't exist
from a false premise
um uh from the if you replace that by
the through premise that quantum theory
is true then it's in this case it's not
so much the quantum theory
has helped you to solve the hard problem
it has removed the impediment of solving
it still doesn't tell you what free will
is or what qualia are or whatever but
it's it's removed the knockdown argument
that for example Freewheel can't exist
qualia can't be different from anything
else unless electrons also have it have
them and so on so you you knock out
a bunch of false arguments
um as as
um generically happens if you have a
fixed fixed false Theory
that you're unwilling to replace or
criticize then you rather like sticking
down a piece of a jigsaw puzzle in the
wrong place and gluing it down that that
will produce errors in the picture
arbitrarily far away from the piece
you've glued down it may look fine near
the piece and then you'll you'll you
won't be able to construct the picture
so this is why the you know this is why
the pursuit of Truth is useful one
reason
to the Multiverse then
um the how would you talk about the
connection
to the issue in regarding what
distinguishes AGI from AI because when
you've written the Articles you've
talked about in papyrian terms the
capacity to conject pressure
which you've referred to yeah sometimes
as as creativity
um those are you know those are
widespread conventional terms but is
there some way to kind of sharpen those
terms in relationship to what's held
multiple times could eliminate many well
uh so I don't think that quantum
computers will be needed to make an AGI
I you know I could be wrong but
um I I don't think that's the kind of
problem it is so therefore I think that
um
a creative program
um could be made on a deterministic
class computer although I must say
immediately that calling that such
computer deterministic when it's an AGI
um somewhat misses the point because the
AGI is going to be interacting with the
world and the world is is uh not going
to be deterministic because among other
things it's quantum
um so so the the uh if creativity
depends on some kind of Randomness
Randomness is everywhere and that that
would be true whether it was classical
or not
whether as a believer in the Multiverse
you can take any comfort at all
um in the context of thinking about
these existential questions from the
thought that the family reach into the
Earth
has at least some probability that we
wanted in the Blackboard
uh I don't because that sort of thing so
again I don't think that probability is
the right way to think about the growth
knowledge and so in this knowledge and
is not the right one to think about you
know but perhaps it's better to think
about about
um being run over crossing the road or
or better
um going to a casino and and uh the
betting and so that there there will be
if if you play your cards right you can
arrange it so that there will always be
some worlds in which you come out a
multi-millionaire
um so now I I think the the the the
um trouble withdrawing
profound conclusions from this is that
one thing we do know about probability
is that if the average interpretation is
true then when
one is analyzing a situation of
randomness
the right uh analysis is the classical
one
so it's a bit boring
I know your views on that I was just
wondering whether a sort of
psychological level when you throw a
step back and think about these
extensional problems how can you not be
struck by the thought that if the
Multiverse is right then it seems almost
inevitable that there are some branches
in which Humanity or a some evolved
version of humanity survives yes as far
as we know I I would try not to uh
um I I would try not to let my
psychological
um approach to a an event
come into conflict between what I know
is there
so uh you know I I I might have I might
have
um an objection to eating a sweet in the
form of a tarantula but then I say to
myself no this isn't a tarantula this is
just a piece of candy and I'm going to
eat it and if you say well yeah but
still still what do you feel about it
well what I feel about it that's
different from the right answer is not
very interesting that's just ways in
which I can be wrong and speaking of
slightly off questions I I'm just so in
your last Edge question you said
but that's the question you said is the
last question was are the ways only
relate to computation and creativity of
free will risk to probability morality
of epistemology of all the same question
I was wondering if you might be able to
elaborate on that yeah well
um since at the last question you'd see
I I thought I would allow myself the
luxury of talking about things I don't
know
and these are three things that I don't
know they could go either way
so for example is morality reducible to
epistemology
well
if it isn't that what on Earth can
morality be
uh it could are there moral
um axioms that are that are
uncriticizable that that would be
authoritarian so
um
on the other hand
um uh if if morale so and that problem
wouldn't arise if it was epistemology
because we already know how to do how to
frame epistemology without requiring
foundation without requiring Authority
and thanks to Paul we know that uh but
um then I I can ask myself what if
the laws of physics were different like
the ones I mentioned with the Greek gods
and the malevolence Suppose there were
malevolence and and the the laws of
physics really did have it in for us and
so on
would that change morality
could could we say like at the moment we
say that that if something is is um
property of the laws of physics it
doesn't have a moral value
Pro or or con but in such unit can we oh
are we am I right in thinking that those
kinds of laws of physics are immoral
or does that not make sense
and I don't know so that's that's the
that's the the kind of thing there and
and that and I'm also wondering in that
question whether there is a connection
between that and the uh the question
that the gentleman who's now left asked
um uh about whether Consciousness and
Free Will and and qualia and and moral
value and all that stuff are all come
together necessarily
or can they be separate or can they be
made separate Perhaps Perhaps up to now
in the universe they've always come
together but we could artificially make
them separate in an AGI
um
uh again I
I think that can't be so but I can't
give you uh watertight argument when I
say so
but I we we have to wait in in all these
cases we have to wait till somebody
comes up with a viable theory of these
things you know I I I'm always a bit
a bit
um perturbed when when people have
strong feelings about
things like free will
um uh moral value you know is it moral
to kill animals eat animals uh are
animals conscious and all those things
when they do not know what Consciousness
is none of us do
it's five o'clock
I think we should end it now thank you
David okay well thank you thank you all